---
layout: post
title: "Week 4"
date: 2021-06-28
categories: GSoC updates
---

## Coding
### CMake polishing
I needed to update my CMake files to work properly with my BBB. It turned out that there is no OpenGL on the Imagination image for BBB and just **EGL** + **GLES**. Therefore I had to write my own _FindEGL.cmake_ which would not depend on **OpenGL**.
I was long baffled by undefined references in my code, until I realized that I need to import system libraries as **UNKNOWN IMPORTED** like this:
```cmake
if (NOT TARGET EGL::EGL)
    add_library(EGL::EGL UNKNOWN IMPORTED)
    set_target_properties(EGL::EGL PROPERTIES
        IMPORTED_LOCATION "${EGL_LIBRARY}")
endif()
```
I also had to specify custom location for _include_ directories for the **EGL** and **GLES** libraries (in _FindX.cmake_ files) like this:
```cmake
if (NOT DEFINED GLES2_INCLUDE_DIR)
    set(GLES2_INCLUDE_DIR "/opt/Native_SDK/include")
endif()

set_target_properties(OpenGLES2::OpenGLES2 PROPERTIES
    INTERFACE_INCLUDE_DIRECTORIES "${GLES2_INCLUDE_DIR}")
```
And then export these libraries by the main library by adding them to **target_include_directories**, since we are probably not using them from the default system include directories.

It turned out that the BBB with Imagination image does not support the EXT extensions to **EGL** I was using on my host to enumerate possible devices to render to, so I decided to try my luck with two supported extensions allowing for creation of custom contexts.

In case you are interested, there is an [official document](https://github.com/powervr-graphics/Native_SDK/blob/master/docs/Architecture%20Guides/PowerVR.Supported%20Extensions.OpenGL%20ES.EGL.pdf) listing the supported extensions on PowerVR platforms.

For now I am trying rendering using a concept known as _render nodes_ which are special wrappers over regular device files for graphic cards. These allow for using the cards without creating a display - ideal solution for this project, **GPGPU**. 

In order to use these nodes we need to create **GBM** which is a Generic Buffer Management system, used to tie the high-level API calls to driver-specific calls. This requires usage of several extensions which fortunately are available on PowerVR SGX5xx platforms. Both the **GBM** device and a rendering surface are created using this API and then bound to the **EGL** rendering context via _eglMakeCurrent_ call.

---------------------

Since getting the context to work on BBB is tedious and may require more work which is not directly related to the library, I am developing the functionality of different API calls on the host and then I will port it to the target platform.

--------------------

The next part of coding this week, is creating a scaffolding which will be used by every API call, such as creating shaders, compiling and linking them, creating the Framebuffer Objects, textures and finally running the actual computation.

More details about how it is done are present in the (upcoming) blog post as for a person not used to complexity of OpenGL it is fairly confusing.

In brief, we are using textures as input data and the framebuffer as our output data. Each pixel (which corresponds to a data quadruplet - RGBA) is then computed in parallel using the **fragment shader** code and output to the framebuffer.

## Reading
The context tackled this week requires even more knowledge on my part (especially polishing my rusty OpenGL skills) I read through following resources:
* https://computer-graphics.se/multicore/pdf/2014/13b%20glsl.pdf
* https://faculty.kaust.edu.sa/sites/markushadwiger/Documents/CS380_spring2013_lecture_03.pdf
* https://www.seas.upenn.edu/~cis565/fbo.htm

## Blog
I am writing a blog which details how the scaffolding of the project works and what components of Linux/GL are necessary to make GPGPU computing a thing with OpenGL ES 2.0.
